>>>>[BACKGROUND MUSIC] And
I think many people today
don't know what to
believe anymore.
>>People are basically
going to keep on
to help uncover what
really happened.
>>I felt like something
was watching me.
>>We weren't given
all the information.
We weren't told
the entire story.
>>GEORGE NOORY: Well,
welcome to "Beyond Belief."
You know, throughout my entire
history of broadcasting,
I've come across one
person, just one person,
who I call the human computer.
This person has an ability to
look at all kinds of events--
technology, economies,
world events--
and he puts it in a perspective
that not only we understand,
but he's extremely insightful.
Our guest today on "Beyond
Belief," Mr.Howard Bloom.
Howard, always a pleasure.
>>HOWARD BLOOM: Thanks, George.
>>NOORY: We have talked so
much on "Coast to Coast,"
yet this is our
very first time--
>>BLOOM: The very first time--
>>NOORY: --we meet directly.
>>BLOOM: In person.
It's amazing.
>>NOORY: And I wonder
if the next time we
do "Coast to Coast,"
if it will even
give it a more different
flavor inasmuch
as once you meet somebody,
you even feel closer to them.
>>BLOOM: That's a very,
very good point-- bonding.
And bonding is very important.
You know that my
background is that I'm
a scientist who ended up in
the rock and roll business,
because I wanted
to see what happens
with mass passions, what
happens with mass emotions.
Mass emotions are the
forces of history.
And Adolf Hitler was
extremely good at manipulating
these mass passions.
And if he could do it, the
good guys have got to do it.
So I wanted to understand
those passions,
and I ended up in the field
that I knew nothing about, which
was the rock and roll business.
And while I was there, one
of the things that I learned
is that the most important
thing you can do,
if you're a rock and roll
artist, is go out on tour
and perform in front of audience
after audience, after audience.
And the reason is
exactly what you just
said-- when you meet
somebody in person
or you see them in
person, and you become
a part of an
emotional experience
in the presence of that person,
that person catalyzes it
for you, you never want
to leave that person again
for the rest your life.
That person stays in your heart
for the rest of your life.
So what you and I are doing
is crude approximation
of what Prince or Michael
Jackson once upon a time.
>>NOORY: When you were
in the music business,
did you come across an
artist that you still
believe to this
day may have been
the most overwhelming
person you've ever met?
>>BLOOM: Well, it
was Michael Jackson.
>>NOORY: Ah!
>>BLOOM: And you would
think Michael Jackson, just
a superficial pop star, right?
No, he wasn't a
superficial pop star.
When I was 10,
there were two rules
that attracted me to science.
Rule number one was
the truth at any price,
including the
price of your life.
You'd be willing to give up
your life on behalf of a truth.
Rule number two was look at
things right under your nose
as if you've never
seen them before
and then proceed from there.
Michael Jackson embodied the
first two rules of science
in a way I've never seen from
another human being in my life
and never even expected to see.
He was beyond human.
But beyond human in
a way we should all
aspire to be beyond human.
>>NOORY: He's sorely
missed, sorely missed.
What a great talent!
>>BLOOM: He's sorely missed.
And two weeks ago,
there was another person
that I've spent a little bit
of time with-- Elon Musk.
Elon Musk is the
head of SpaceX, which
is the only private
company, in fact, it's
the only company in the
world right now in America
that can get Americans to
space in American vehicles,
it can get American cargo to--
>>NOORY: Heads up, Tesla
Motors came up with that idea.
>>BLOOM: --and Tesla
Motors, exactly.
And I said to somebody,
one of the reasons
that I was attracted
to Elon, one
of the reasons I had four phone
calls with him is because here
I've spent my whole life looking
for the forces of history.
And I could see that Elon
was one of those people who
will be remembered
150 years from now.
And the person on the
other end of the phone
said, wait a minute, you're
forgetting about somebody,
aren't you?
And I wanted to know who.
He said, Michael Jackson.
Now, if Michael Jackson is
able to survive for 150 years,
he does set a new standard.
When you come to
understand how deeply,
how intensely he could--
Well, one day, we
were at his brother
Marlon's pool house,
a little house
out in the back
of the main house.
And it's a house
much smaller than--
>>NOORY: But, was this
before, Howard, he
started doing all this
heavy plastic surgery?
Or what that ongoing?
>>BLOOM: It was, no, he looked
like a perfectly normal person
at that point.
And so they've got
an appointment,
it's a little room, and there's
a pool table in the middle.
And there are all
these arcade games
around the sides of the
room, the kinds of games
only billionaires can afford.
And the guys had a meeting
with the art director
from CBS Records.
Well, Michael came
shortly before the meeting
with the art director.
I had learned a
lesson, I grew up
among Guinea pigs and laboratory
rats, not human beings,
so I don't understand
human rituals.
But I had through
observation noticed
that when you meet
a new person, you
walk over, you
put your hand out,
and you say, hi,
your name is Howard.
So the screen door
began to open.
I walked over and
put my hand out,
and said, "Hi, my
name is Howard."
I had read thousands of
articles on Michael by then.
They all said he
was a bubble baby.
They all said--
>>NOORY: He didn't touch people?
>>BLOOM: No, that
he would retract,
that he'd shy away
from your hand.
No, he put out his hand.
It wasn't a hard grip,
it wasn't a soft grip.
It was a normal grip.
It was a human grip.
And said, "Hi, I'm Michael."
And I had a press release I
wanted to get him to approve.
I told him.
He said, let's go up
to the second floor.
The second floor was just jammed
with equipment-- amplifiers,
keyboards, no place,
really, to sit.
So we sat on amplifiers.
I read him the press release.
And as I read it to him,
he started sliding down
on the amplifier like
this, and his face
got more and more-- I
couldn't quite tell what.
And then, when I finished, he
said, "Did you write that?"
Yes, I had.
He said, "That was beautiful."
In other words, Michael
could see the craft
in the tiniest of things.
>>NOORY: That's right,
and it affected him.
>>BLOOM: Yeah.
And then we went down to
be with the art director.
The art director
came in with five
of the most gorgeous
portfolios you've ever seen.
These are America's
five top artists.
And she slid them across
the pool table at us.
Michael and I were standing
next to each other,
and the brothers were
standing around us.
When Michael started
to open the first page
of the first portfolio, he only
got an inch open, and he went,
oh.
And then he opened
another inch-- oh.
And then more-- oh.
And what you could feel
in his body language,
because he was
going orgasmic, it
was as if he were having the
ultimate sexual experience,
but he was having
it aesthetically.
>>NOORY: In his head.
>>BLOOM: Yeah.
And you could feel
that Michael was
seeing the infinite in
the tiniest of things.
Everything that William
Blake ever talked about,
when he talked about seeing
the world in a grain of sand--
>>NOORY: Uh-ha, right there.
>>BLOOM: Right there.
And it was so visceral.
It took over
Michael's entire body.
So that second law
of science-- look
at things right under your
nose as if you've never
seen them before
and then proceed
from there-- that's a
law of awe and wonder.
Michael was awe
embodied and personified
in a way I had
never, ever imagined
a human on the face of
planet Earth could be.
>>NOORY: And he gave it
when he was on stage.
He gave it.
Which reminds me of what
happened several weeks ago--
>>BLOOM: Yeah?
>>NOORY: The hologram of
Michael Jackson at a concert.
It looked like he
was really there.
Are we going too
far with technology?
>>BLOOM: No, we're not
going too far at all,
because, look, Michael's
ultimate task, for example,
was to bring the quality
of awe and wonder.
He felt God had given him that
capacity for awe and wonder.
He realized how unusual it was.
And he felt that since
God had given it to him,
that made it his
obligation to give it
to his fellow human beings.
What does that have
to do with technology?
The Oculus Rift.
The Oculus Rift
is this big thing
that you wear on your head
that creates a total 3D
virtual environment.
So you're no longer just doing
shoot-'em-up games in the wars
in the jungles of
Vietnam, you are there.
You are surrounded
by this thing.
All my friends in
the tech community
are talking about it right now.
Think about this for a second.
You walk down the street.
You're in LA or Portland,
Oregon, or here in Colorado.
And you decide to get on
the phone with a friend.
You've just had an emotionally
disturbing thing happen.
Your best friend
is in Beijing, just
temporarily for a year or two.
>>NOORY: Sure, but gone.
>>BLOOM: Yeah, you
get on the phone
and you talk to your
friend in Beijing.
You realize what
evolution, what nature
would have had to go through
to give you the powers
to speak over a
distance of 12,000 miles
and to hear what's going
on on the other end?
>>NOORY: It would not have
happened in evolution,
unless we did it telepathically,
of course, right?
>>BLOOM: Well, it
happened through us.
Evolution evolved us, and
we evolved these machines.
But these machines not only give
astonishing new powers to us,
they give astonishing
new powers to the cosmos.
Now, that seems like a slightly
overblown statement, right?
Well, this cosmos has
already invented things
like atoms and
galaxies, and stars.
And then it invented you and me.
And now that it's
invented through us.
Now that it's invented
the iPhone and the iPad,
that's given the cosmos itself
astonishingly new powers.
And since this cosmos is
all about the process--
we call it evolution.
But it's the process
of discovering
her own possibilities,
discovering her own potential.
And she discovers it through
the creatures that she creates.
And then those creatures in
turn discover new possibilities
that upset and
upend her old ways.
Nature is all about
changing herself.
reinventing herself.
Nature is all about
hoisting herself up
by her own boot laces.
And she does it
through you and me.
So does nature want technology?
You bet, because
nature's always out
for the next radical
reinvention of herself.
>>NOORY: I've got six
grandchildren, Howard.
And--
>>BLOOM: That is
amazing, George.
>>NOORY: --two of them lived
in my Saint Louis house.
>>BLOOM: Yeah?
>>NOORY: My son moved back
from Las Vegas with his wife
starting his new
career, doing very well.
But they needed a place to stay.
>>BLOOM: Right.
>>NOORY: So they stay
at good old dad's place.
So I've got a two-year-old and
a four-year-old living there.
And when I'm there,
they're there.
And they come running
into my room-- papa,
papa, papa, tickle me, tickle
me, jump on me, all that stuff.
But I've noticed that they
have understood technology.
They walk around with iPads.
And the little two-year-old
uses her mother's smartphone.
>>BLOOM: Fantastic.
>>NOORY: And she's
playing little games.
She knows where all
the buttons are.
And it is absolutely
amazing watching
them go through this scenario.
>>BLOOM: But here's something
you really have to realize.
We are born with twice as many
neurons, twice as many nerve
cells in our brain as we need.
Why?
Because over the course
of the first four years
or so, the cells that are used
and the cell assemblies that
are used, they will
stick around vigorously.
They'll have vigorous health.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>BLOOM: The ones that aren't
used, that aren't tapped.
>>NOORY: They shrivel up.
>>BLOOM: They die.
It's called apoptosis,
pre-programmed cell death.
>>NOORY: Unless they're used.
>>BLOOM: Unless they're used.
Now, when you give a child
an iPhone or an iPad,
cell assemblies are being used
that were never used before.
So those, the cell
assemblies that
are staying alive and
becoming part of the brain
are cell assemblies that
in their own peculiar way
were never used before in
the history of mankind, which
means that by the time your
grandkids are six years old,
they have brains utterly unlike
yours, utterly unlike mine,
utterly unlike any of
the brains that have ever
existed on the face of
planet Earth before.
The technology has
become like fingernails--
a part of their
body, a prosthetic.
>>NOORY: It is.
And it's made them grow.
>>BLOOM: Yeah.
>>NOORY: That's probably why
they're better at it than I
am--
>>BLOOM: There's
another little fact.
>>NOORY: --because those
cells are gone for me, right?
>>BLOOM: Well,
there's a simple fact
that there are books
like "The Shallows"
that say that all
these technologies are
dumbing our kids down.
Once upon a time there
was a philosopher
who said the same thing.
It was 300-400 BC.
And he said, these
new technologies
are going to dumb kids down.
What was he talking about?
Books.
His name was Plato.
So this complaint's has
been around a long time.
But if you give
the average dummy
in the street, the
average high school
kid that we think
has been dumbed down,
give a whole hundred of
them, a Stanford-Binet IQ
test from 1900, they will
register as marginal geniuses.
>>NOORY: Yes, that's right.
>>BLOOM: Because they've been
given an extra 35 points in IQ
over the course of
the last 114 years.
And we've done that in
Western civilization.
And we don't realize
that we've done it.
>>NOORY: Is that a good thing?
>>BLOOM: It's a wonderful thing.
It's a tremendous
thing, because you've
got 7 billion people
on planet Earth today.
Paul Ehrlich in 1968,
the Stanford biologist,
said that the population bomb
was going to kill us all.
Well, the population
bomb has enriched us all,
because the more brains
you bring into the process,
the faster the
creative growth goes,
and the more of
these vast upheavals,
like the iPhone and the iPad
take place in a lifetime,
and the more nature ends up
expanding her own capabilities.
>>NOORY: Why is it that I
sense right now that humankind
is ticked off, not
happy, upset, concerned,
road rage is at a record high.
>>BLOOM: Right.
>>NOORY: What is
going on with people?
>>BLOOM: Well there
are a couple of things.
>>NOORY: I sense it,
and you sense it.
>>BLOOM: Well, we've talk about
it very frequently on "Coast
to Coast."
First of all, we,
humans are built
with a chronic
sense of discontent.
No matter what we've got,
it isn't good enough.
One day I was
sitting with one of
these precocious
nine-year-olds, who
was part of the iPad and
cell phone generation,
and we were
discussing this issue.
Can you imagine
that discussing--
>>NOORY: You and
a nine-year-old?
>>BLOOM: Right.
And he said, "Wait, I got
to show you something."
And he shows me the
intro to "The Jetsons."
["THE JETSONS" THEME SONG]
And he says, "See, these
people are in the 21st century
and they've got everything
that we ever dreamed of having.
And because it's ordinary to
them, it's nothing to them."
>>NOORY: It's nothing.
>>BLOOM: And they're
still discontent.
And it's a nine-year-old
who is telling me
this piece of
philosophy, George.
>>NOORY: And I
love "The Jetsons."
>>BLOOM: Well, so
but the message
is one of the great
things that drives us,
one of the things we need to
be grateful for is discontent,
discontent with
ourselves, discontent
with our surroundings.
Now, something different
with road rage,
because there you have--
>>NOORY: Yeah, but the
discontent has changed.
It's become more
than discontent.
It's become-- your discontent
is that striving to learn more
to be better that I like this
job, but I want a better one.
I'm sensing a different
kind of discontent.
I'm sensing a discontent
of bitterness, of anger.
And I can't put my finger on it.
>>BLOOM: There is
something that we
haven't talked about
on "Coast to Coast."
And that is America needs
a vision transplant.
People need very deeply to have
something transcendent to feel
that there is something
bigger than themselves
that they are striving for.
That's a vital human need.
And in Western
civilization today, we
assume that people are
motivated by money.
No, money is a minor
motivation compared to status
and compared to a higher truth.
>>NOORY: Money doesn't
make you happy.
>>BLOOM: Right.
>>NOORY: It's good to
have it to pay your bills,
but I've seen more
wealthy people miserable.
I really have.
>>BLOOM: Because you need
that sense of a commitment
to something far
larger than yourself
that is going to
expand all of humanity
and is going to do wonderful
things for your grandkids.
And in America, we
don't know that.
We don't know that
the reason that ISIS,
the Islamic State
of Iraq and Syria,
is rolling up the
roads toward Baghdad
right now is because they
believe in a higher truth.
They believe that they
are part of something
much bigger than themselves.
Hey, we are something much
bigger than ourselves, too.
Not only have we
added that extra 35
points to the average
IQ, we've made sure
that the poorest
paid worker in London
earns what an entire
tenement full of workers
used to earn in 1850.
We've made sure that the
level of peace in our society
is 9 times as high as it is in
an indigenous tribal culture.
We have accomplished
material miracles.
And we do represent the
next best hope of humanity.
But until we know
that, as long as we're
being told that,
no, we're the worst
society in the history
of mankind and all
we're really after
is money, we're
not going to recognize that
we are after something bigger,
and we are achieving
something bigger.
And then now, we
have to perceive
that we are achieving
something bigger so we know
we are striving toward
a higher purpose.
>>NOORY: Remember
the movie "Network?"
Peter Finch playing the
part of "Howard Beale"?
>>BLOOM: Yes, right.
I'm not going to take
this anymore, right.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK - "NETWORK"]
>>Stick your head
out of the window.
Ppen it, and stick your
head out, and keep yelling,
and yell, "I'm as mad as hell.
I'm not going to
take this anymore."
Just get up from your chairs
right now, go to the window--
>>Where are going?
>>I want to see if
anybody is yelling.
>>Everybody, just go
to the window, open it,
and stick your head out, and
yell, and keep yelling, "I'm--"
>>I'm mad as hell.
I'm not going to
take this anymore.
>>I'm mad as hell.
I'm not going to
take it anymore.
>>I'm mad as hell.
And I'm not going
to take it anymore.
>>I'm mad as hell.
I'm not going to
take it anymore.
>>I'm mad as hell.
And I'm not going
to take it anymore.
>>I'm not going to
take it anymore.
[END OF VIDEO PLAYBACK]
My favorite scene that I
use on "Coast to Coast"
quite often, when we do special
open lines is, leave us alone.
Just give us our radial
tires and our toasters,
and our telly, and
leave us alone,
because I'm as mad
as hell, and I'm not
going to take it anymore.
That's what I sense right now.
>>BLOOM: Right, but
people in reality,
people don't want
to be left alone.
People want the
comradeship of bonding
with other human
beings, the way you
and I are bonding right now.
But they want to be in
the trenches pursuing
projects that mean something.
>>NOORY: But they don't want
government telling them what
to do--
>>BLOOM: That's right.
>>NOORY: --controlling them--
>>NOORY: --manipulating them.
>>BLOOM: They want, although,
when you talk to veterans ,
veterans will tell you that one
of the reasons they're having
a hard time when they come back
home is because they were part
of a very bonded unit, fighting
on each other's behalf--
>>NOORY: And they miss that.
>>BLOOM: They miss
that tremendously.
And you and I can have it, if
we know that we are striving to,
now that we've been given
an extra 40 years of life
by our great
grandparents, you know,
if you'd been born in
1850, your life expectancy
would have been 38.5 years,
born in 2000-- 78.5 years.
So if our great grandparents
could give us an extra 40
years of life, we owe at least
an extra 60 years of life
to our great grandchildren.
If our great grandparents
could give us
35 points on the average IQ,
we owe another 40 or 45 points
to our great grandchildren.
If our great great
grandparents could increase
the amount of peace
by a factor of 9,
we owe another
factor of 9 at least
to our great great grandkids.
And unless we live
up to that, we
are failing the generations
beyond our time.
And we cannot
afford to fail them.
If we know this, George,
that is a higher purpose,
that is a transcendent cause,
that is a greater truth.
And it does things on behalf
of the very cosmos and nature
that gave us birth.
It expands nature and
the cosmos powers.
But we have to know that.
>>NOORY: I did a two-week
stint at the Pentagon
when I was in the Navy.
>>BLOOM: Wow.
>>NOORY: And I met
some great guys
that had a great camaraderie.
And after the two
weeks, when I came back
to my job, my civilization,
I missed that.
I missed that
feeling that we had.
We would work at the Pentagon,
we'd go out at night.
And we did that for
two solid weeks.
And we got to be really close.
And so I can only
imagine what it's
like for somebody in Afghanistan
or Iraq, or in military duty,
serving two years.
And then it's gone,
just like that.
That's got to be rough.
>>BLOOM: It's like
withdrawal from heroin.
We all need to be bonded.
It's functional bonding,
is what I call it.
In other words, we bond
around having a common purpose
and doing practical things to
work for that common purpose.
Now, you know from
just your involvement
with radio all these years, you
go through periods of crisis,
inevitably, when you're
trying to achieve a goal,
even if your goal is
career advancement.
And when you go through
a crisis together,
it pulls you
together in ways that
give you a fellowship
that never ends.
We all need that,
but we need, again,
to experience it working on
behalf of a higher truth.
>>NOORY: I don't feel
that pulling together
of people anymore.
We had it during
the Kennedy era.
And we lost it when
he was assassinated.
And I don't think
we've gotten it back.
>>BLOOM: No, Kennedy said
some very important things.
He said, ask not
what you can do--
or what your country
can do for you,
ask what you can do
for your country.
Nobody has called
on us for that.
I'm right now reading probably
the hundredth book on strategy
that I've ever read.
There's one thing in
Western books on strategy
that's never mentioned.
A higher truth is
never, ever mentioned.
And it's the most
important part of strategy.
And for all practical purposes,
we're in a never-ending war.
What is it a war for?
A peaceful war.
It is a war for creativity.
It is a war to advance mankind.
It is a war to pull even
the poorest of people
up to the level that
would have surprised
the richest of people in 1850.
There was this immensely
rich guy in 1850 in Britain.
And he was a technophile.
He loved technology.
>>NOORY: They had
technology then?
>>BLOOM: Oh, yes.
And in 1850, he
was able to build
a building made of
all glass and steel.
The whole thing looks
like a big greenhouse.
And was able to pull in
the latest next generation
technologies from South America,
from Russia, from China,
from all over the world.
>>NOORY: What could
that have been?
Like a wagon?
>>BLOOM: It was
called-- no, these
were envelope
folding machines that
would make 12,000
envelopes an hour.
These were the machines
that made bridges,
and the machines that
made railroad tracks--
all kinds of
astonishing new things.
This guy died at the
age of 42, because he
didn't have a simple antibiotic
that any person, street person,
can get if they managed to
make it to an emergency care
facility.
He died.
His name was Prince Albert.
His wife's name
was Queen Victoria.
In other words, homeless
people have powers today
that Prince Albert could
not achieve in 1850.
That's your job and
mine is to make sure
that the next unimaginable
impossibilities come rattling
around the bend to become
part of the human repertoire,
nature's repertoire, and
the cosmos' repertoire.
Some time, either
while we're still alive
or after we're gone.
But you and I have to
set the stage for that.
And if we don't realize
that that's our obligation,
we don't have a reason to bond.
>>NOORY: We have more
power in our smartphones
than they had on the
Apollo 11 Moon landing.
>>BLOOM: Yes, exactly.
>>NOORY: Buzz Aldrin was
telling me on the show
once that they almost
did not launch off
the face of the Moon.
He had to use a Bic pen
to stick down into a hole
to ignite it to get up.
>>BLOOM: Well, OK.
Buzz and I are friends.
And one day, I'm
getting on a plane,
the Air Force is flying
me down to Washington
to talk about harvesting
solar power in space
and transmitting it
down to Earth using
these kinds of signals, right?
And I get on the
plane and I hear
this voice, "Howard,
is that you?"
And of course, it's Buzz.
Now I'm already seated next
to the most attractive woman
in the waiting room--
>>NOORY: And you didn't
tell him to swear on a Bible
whether he was on
the Moon, right?
>>BLOOM: No, but so we got off.
We didn't have a
chance to sit together.
It was assigned seating.
We get off.
We took that long, long
walk from the plane
to the luggage
terminal together.
And I got off on a rant, George.
I tend to get very evangelistic
for an atheist, yes,
especially for an atheist.
>>NOORY: Who am I
trying to convince
that there's something else?
>>BLOOM: Yes, and so I
tried to explain to Buzz,
look, it's your obligation, it's
my obligation to make history.
You and I wake up in the
morning absolutely certain
that we're of no value to the
rest of humankind whatsoever.
We're sure that we can't do the
things that we did yesterday.
We have all kinds of
doubts and insecurities.
But hey, guess what?
A couple of guys who had the
same kind of insecurities
you and I have,
who had depressions
that were even worse than
your depressions and mine,
managed to save the
world once upon a time.
They were Winston Churchill
and Franklin Delano Roosevelt
up against Adolf Hitler.
If guys who had
dandruff, if guys
who itched at
inappropriate times,
if guys who made strange
noises in the bathroom,
if these people
could make history,
then it's your job and
my job to make history.
And Buzz, sometimes
you've had this,
because you perform in
front of live audiences
every one once in a while.
Sometimes when you're
performing for an audience,
their pupils dilate, they open
wide, and their face melts.
And it's--
>>NOORY: They're mesmerized.
>>BLOOM: Yeah, it's an
astonishing experience.
Buzz was like that.
And I couldn't understand why.
I noticed for the
first time after years
of knowing him that
his eyes were blue.
I noticed for the first that
he was even shorter than I am,
which is hard, really hard.
You know, it's good for
stuffing him into a tin can--
>>NOORY: Oh, yeah. it worked.
>>BLOOM: --and sending
him into space, yeah.
>>NOORY: That's right.
>>BLOOM: So when I was
finished, I was so embarrassed,
it was ridiculous.
And basically, I
was telling myself,
Bloom, you idiot, don't
you realize this guy's
been in history
books for 40 years?
For three months I kicked
myself around the block
for having embarrassed
myself in this way.
And then I realized something.
Buzz did the highest thing
that he could possibly
ever do-- setting
foot on the Moon.
He was the spear tip of
a $120 billion project--
so once-in-a-lifetime
experience.
When he came back
from the Moon, he
went into a state of alcoholism
and depression for 10 years.
It was very, very hard for him
to find new purposes in life.
And we all need purpose.
It's back to that business--
>>NOORY: It was a letdown.
>>BLOOM: --the
transcendent truth, yeah.
He needed that lecture
probably more than anybody else
I've ever been
inspired to give it to.
But what a weird thing
for your brain, you know,
when you consider yourself to be
reasonably intelligent to take
three months to figure out what,
apparently, your gut already
knew.
Very bizarre experience, George.
>>NOORY: What are these
trinkets all over you?
>>BLOOM: These are the
expansions of my powers,
thanks to technology.
These are our prosthesis,
for all practical purposes.
These two things are
eight-hour recorders.
Back in when I was still
stuck in bed in 2000, 2001,
there was a very high-placed
advertising executive.
She did the branding for Reebok
and Nike, and PlayStation 2,
and all kinds of things.
And she used to come out
to the apartment once
every three months.
She was a huge fan of my books.
And she said, you
know, your real art
is verbal improvisation.
You have to start recording
everything that you say.
Now, I know that sounds
ridiculously egotistical,
but I followed her advice.
So these are eight-hour
recording devices.
>>NOORY: So you're constantly
recording yourself?
>>BLOOM: Everything.
Yeah, nobody ever will have
a chance to listen to it.
>>NOORY: You mean,
what you and I
were talking about before
the show is on that thing?
[LAUGH]
>>BLOOM: Oh, those weird sexual
experiences of yours, George.
>>NOORY: Oh, thanks a lot.
>>BLOOM: I promise
never to tell your wife.
>>NOORY: Is there a
12-minute gap there?
>>BLOOM: No, one goes on
before the other one turns off.
So there's no 20-minute gaps.
But this is a
pedometer, so that I
can measure how far I'm
walking during the day.
>>NOORY: Well, because you were
bedridden for how many years?
>>BLOOM: I was
bedridden for 15 years
and for five years
was too weak to speak
a single word of the
English language.
>>You must just get excited
when you see I did a mile today.
>>BLOOM: Yes, exactly.
And these are two
Kindles, you know,
the Kindles read
out loud to me, so.
>>NOORY: When you go
through TSA security--
>>BLOOM: Yeah?
>>NOORY: --do you have to
take all that stuff off?
>>BLOOM: Yes, it takes about
20 minutes to take it all off.
It takes about 20 minutes
to put it all back on again.
>>NOORY: I would not want
to be the guy behind you.
>>BLOOM: No, I let
them go through.
I just make them go through.
But this stuff is
wonderful, George.
Just think, 20 years
ago, 30 years ago,
before the Walkman, so
that's about 40 years ago,
you and I used to
walk down the street,
and we were all by
ourselves, stuck
in the loneliness of our skulls.
>>NOORY: We didn't have phones.
We didn't have anything.
>>BLOOM: That's right.
>>NOORY: Sometimes though--
>>BLOOM: Yeah?
>>NOORY: --it was a
little more peaceful.
>>BLOOM: But peace is not what
it's cracked up to be, George.
Excitement is what
it's cracked up to be.
>>NOORY: So you like
this new technology?
>>BLOOM: Oh, I love
having information
pouring through
me 24 hours a day.
You know, because I
was flying out here,
I was away from my information
for roughly an hour.
>>NOORY: Did you freak?
>>BLOOM: Yes.
I mean things are
happening in rock.
I need to be on those things.
All kinds of things.
I need to be on them--
>>NOORY: That's why I call
you the human computer.
>>BLOOM: --minute by minute.
Right, that's why--
OK, nobody knows this,
but we've got to tell
the audience this.
So George's producer
calls me, sometimes
on 20-minutes' notice.
And in the old days, your
producer used to say,
do you know anything about
the following subject?
And of course, I
always answer yes,
because I'm not going to miss
going on the air with you.
What does she think
I am, an idiot?
So and then one night, it was
22 degrees in New York City.
I was stepping out
of the Tea Lounge,
this huge club where I've
written three books now.
I was about to go for my
walk through the park.
And my way home, last
thing I wanted to do
was take off my gloves.
The weather was horrible.
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>BLOOM: And the phone rang.
And I thought,
should I take it--
>>NOORY: And you had to
take your gloves off.
>>BLOOM: --should I take it?
So I took the gloves off
and I answered the phone.
And it was Lisa Lions,
one of your producers.
And Lisa said, do
you know anything
about the movie "Avatar"?
And I said, Lisa, I don't
have time to watch movies.
I don't know anything about it.
And she said, well, kids
are getting suicidal
after watching the film.
Do you know why?
And I said, yes, of
course, I know why.
And I told her about
Anousheh Ansari's depression
after she went up on
the International Space
Station for roughly 10 days
and came back to Earth.
And up there,
there'd been peace.
And she could hold the world--
>>NOORY: Tranquility.
>>BLOOM: --in the
palm of her hand.
And all of a sudden,
now, she was going back
to violence and hatred, and
road rage, and all these things.
And Lisa said, OK, can
you be on in 20 minutes?
>>NOORY: You're on.
>>BLOOM: So I am usually on
with you after two hours.
Now, I do my
homework like crazy,
because I want to give you
absolutely the best and most
recent facts I can.
>>NOORY: And you always do.
>>BLOOM: But it's hard,
George, because you
are a former news-- whatever
the news guy is called.
>>NOORY: Yeah, I
was the executive.
>>BLOOM: Yeah, and so
you're so on top of the news
that it's ridiculous.
Two nights ago or three
nights ago when we did Iraq,
you already had half
the things that I
was going to tell you
right in your report.
And you're always that way.
You always have facts that
are so right up to the minute,
it's ridiculous.
>>NOORY: Well, that's what I do.
>>BLOOM: So running
the race with you
and keeping up with
you-- very hard.
>>NOORY: This has been fun.
In our next "Beyond
Belief," I want
to get into a segment
called "Ask Howard."
And we're going to do
some things like that.
But what drives you?
What keeps pushing you?
>>BLOOM: I love
knowing things, and I
love being a value to
my fellow human beings.
So I love taking
all this information
and pouring it through
the sieve, the leaky
sieve of a brain.
It really is a leaky sieve.
And trying to see things
from points of view--
it's that second
law of science--
see things from points
of view they've never
been seen from before, so
that you don't get blindsided.
And if I can successfully
do that for you
or for the people at the Office
of the Secretary of Defense,
because they pulled
me in, or any other,
or the press for the 11th
president of India, who also
thinks I'm some
sort of something,
and Buzz Aldrin, hey, I'm having
a good day, I'm having a ball.
>>NOORY: Well, you give
off a lot of energy.
>>BLOOM: But--
it's because you're
giving me a lot of energy.
We get our energy
from the people
who are kind enough to
listen to us and energize us.
So yeah, this stuff is so much
fun, George, it's ridiculous.
>>NOORY: More to come.
Howard, thanks for being
on "Beyond Belief."
>>BLOOM: George, thank you.
And great to see you in person.
>>NOORY: Now you know why I
call him the human computer.
And on our next "Beyond
Belief" with Howard Bloom,
we're going to be talking
about all kinds of things that
will fascinate you, including
a segment called "Ask Howard."
Don't miss it.
[THEME MUSIC]